Introducing kiota.config spec (#3841)
microsoft/kiota: specs/kiota.config.md

# Kiota Config

Kiota generates client code for an API and stores parameters in a kiota.lock file. A project can contain multiple API clients, but they are independently managed. Kiota has no awareness that an app has a dependency on multiple APIs, even though that is a core use case.

## Status

| Date | Version | Author | Status |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| November 30th, 2023 | v0.3 | Sébastien Levert | Final Draft |
| November 22nd, 2023 | v0.2 | Sébastien Levert | Draft |
| September 24th, 2023 | v0.1 | Darrel Miller | Draft |

## Current Challenges

- Client code generation is not reproducible if API description changes

> - Kiota doesn’t have a good solution for APIs that use multiple security schemes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Kiota doesn’t have an obvious solution for APIs that use multiple security schemes.
```
the current solution is good and works well, if you know the expectation is "generate multiple clients" but since we don't advertise that anywhere, it's hard to come to that conclusion.

- Kiota doesn’t provide any support for generating auth providers with the required permissions, partially because currently we generate one client for APIs that use different schemes. How would we know which auth provider to generate.

> - Kiota doesn’t have a good story for acquiring a client identifier. e.g. apikey or OAuth2 ClientId. This could be possible if the OpenIDConnect URL pointed to a dynamic registration endpoint.

Reviewer: to me this point and the previous are effectively the same thing, I'm not sure why you needed to include 2?

## Proposal

We should introduce a new Kiota.config file that holds the input parameters required to generate the API Client code. Currently kiota.lock is used to capture what the parameters were at the time of generation and can be used to regenerate based on the parameters in the file. This creates a mixture of purposes for the file.

We did consider creating one kiota.config file as as a peer of the language project file, however, for someone who wants to generate multiple clients for an API in different languages, this would be a bit annoying. An alternative would be to allow the kiota.config file to move further up the folder structure and support generation in multiple languages from a single file. This is more consistent with what [TypeSpec](https://aka.ms/typespec) are doing and would be helpful for generating CLI and docs as well as a library.

Here is an example of what the kiota.config file could look like.

```json
{
  "name": "My application",
  "apis": {
    "Graph": {
      "descriptionHash": "9EDF8506CB74FE44...",

>       "descriptionLocation": "https://.../openapi.yaml",

Reviewer: we might want to include the search key, especially when we talk about integrating with multiple registries and assuming the location under a search key can change.
I think the location should only be included in the config file when it's been provided by the user directly.
Associated to that. the "resolved location" (where did we put the local copy) should be in the lock file.

Author: Why? Once it's "found", I expect the absolute location to be the only thing we need. What would be the use case here?

Reviewer: search key remains the same but the URI of the description changes between initial generation and update

      "includePatterns": ["/me/chats#GET", "/me#GET"],
      "excludePatterns": [],
      "clients": [
        {
          "language": "csharp",
          "outputPath": "./generated/graph/csharp",
          "clientClassName": "GraphClient",
          "clientNamespaceName": "Contoso.GraphApp",
          "features": {
            "authentication": {

>               "authenticationProvider": "Microsoft.Kiota.Authentication.AzureAuthProvider",

Author: I will be leaving out the auth aspects, for now. We'll revisit in the future.

  "descriptionHash": "9EDF8506CB74FE44...",
  "descriptionLocation": "https://.../openapi.yaml",
  "includePatterns": ["/me/chats#GET", "/me#GET"],
  "excludePatterns": []
}
```

The resulting `kiota.config` file will look like this:

```javascript
{
  "name": "My application",
  "apis": {
    "graph": {
      "descriptionHash": "9EDF8506CB74FE44...",
      "descriptionLocation": "https://.../openapi.yaml",
      "includePatterns": ["/me/chats#GET", "/me#GET"],
      "excludePatterns": []
    }
  }
}
```

### kiota api delete

`kiota api delete` allows a developer to delete an existing API from the `kiota.config` file. The command will remove the entry from the `apis` section of the `kiota.config` file. The command has one required parameter, the name of the API (key of the apis map). The command also has one optional parameter, the ability to remove generated clients. If provided, kiota will delete the folder specified at the `outputPath` from the client configuration.

| Parameters | Required | Example | Description |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `--api-name \| --api` | Yes | graph | Name of the API |
| `--clean-output \| --co` | No |  | Cleans the generated clients from the API |

> #### Using kiota api delete

Reviewer: removing a client/api should also remove the source if the API came from a registry

```bash
kiota api delete --api-name "graph" --clean-output
```

```javascript
// Removes the following from the kiota.config file

> "graph": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "graph": {
```

| `--structured-mime-types \| -m` | No | `application/json` |Any valid MIME type which will match a request body type or a response type in the OpenAPI description. Default are documented [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/openapi/kiota/using#--structured-mime-types--m). |
| `--output \| -o` | No | ./generated/graph/csharp | The output directory or file path for the generated code files. Defaults to `./output`. |

> [!NOTE] 
> It is not required to use the CLI to ad a new clients. It is possible to add a new client by adding a new entry in the `clients` section of the `kiota.config` file. See [kiota.config](#kiotaconfig) for more information.

#### Using kiota client add

```bash
kiota client add --api-name "graph" --client-name "graphDelegated" --language csharp --class-name "GraphClient" --namespace-name "Contoso.GraphApp" --backing-store --exclude-backward-compatible --serializer "Contoso.Json.CustomSerializer" --deserializer "Contoso.Json.CustomDeserializer" -structured-mime-types "application/json" --output "./generated/graph/csharp"
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsonc
```

// Adds the following to the kiota.config file
"clients": {
  "graphDelegated": {
    "language": "csharp",
    "outputPath": "./generated/graph/csharp",
    "clientClassName": "GraphClient",
    "clientNamespaceName": "Contoso.GraphApp",
    "features": {
      // Adding for future visibility, but not required for now
      /*"authentication": {
        "authenticationProvider": "Microsoft.Kiota.Authentication.AzureAuthProvider",
        "authenticationParameters": {
          "clientId": "guid"
        },
      },*/
      "serializers": [
        "Contoso.Json.CustomSerializer"
      ],
      "deserializers": [
        "Contoso.Json.CustomDeserializer"
      ],
      "structuredMimeTypes": [
        "application/json"
      ],
      "usesBackingStore": true,
      "includeAdditionalData": true
    }
  }
}
```

The resulting `kiota.config` file will look like this:

> ```javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsonc
```

            ],
            "structuredMimeTypes": [
              "application/json"
            ],
            "usesBackingStore": true,
            "includeAdditionalData": true
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### kiota client delete

`kiota api client` allows a developer to delete an existing client from the `kiota.config` file. The command will remove the entry from the `clients` section of parent API within the `kiota.config` file. The command has two required parameters, the name of the API and the name of the client. The command also has one optional parameter, the ability to remove the generated client. If provided, kiota will delete the folder specified at the `outputPath` from the client configuration.

| Parameters | Required | Example | Description |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `--api-name \| --api` | Yes | graph | Name of the API |
| `--client-name \| --cn` | Yes | graphDelegated | Name of the client |
| `--clean-output \| --co` | No |  | Cleans the generated client |

#### Using kiota client delete

```bash
kiota client delete --api-name "graph" --client-name "graphDelegated" --clean-output
```

```jsonc
// Removes the following from the kiota.config file

> "graphDelegated": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "graphDelegated": {
```

  "language": "csharp",
  "outputPath": "./generated/graph/csharp",
  "clientClassName": "GraphClient",
  "clientNamespaceName": "Contoso.GraphApp",
  "features": {
    // Adding for future visibility, but not required for now
    /*"authentication": {
      "authenticationProvider": "Microsoft.Kiota.Authentication.AzureAuthProvider",
      "authenticationParameters": {
        "clientId": "guid"
      },
    },*/
    "serializers": [
      "Contoso.Json.CustomSerializer"
    ],
    "deserializers": [
      "Contoso.Json.CustomDeserializer"
    ],
    "structuredMimeTypes": [
      "application/json"
    ],
    "usesBackingStore": true,
    "includeAdditionalData": true
  }
}
```

The resulting `kiota.config` file will look like this:

```javascript
{
  "name": "My application",
  "version": "1.0",
  "apis": {
    "graph": {
      "descriptionHash": "9EDF8506CB74FE44...",
      "descriptionLocation": "https://.../openapi.yaml",
      "includePatterns": ["/me/chats#GET", "/me#GET"],
      "excludePatterns": [],
      "clients": { }
    }
  }
}
```

### kiota generate

> Now that we have a `kiota.config` file, all the parameters required to generate the code are stored in the file. The `kiota generate` command will read the `kiota.config` file and generate the code for each of the clients. 

Reviewer: If we want to keep the current CLI surface compatibility (not saying that we absolutely have to), we might want to keep the generate command as it. And when you call it, it'd do the following:
1. init (if required)
2. add (if required)
3. update

      "includePatterns": ["/me/chats#GET", "/me#GET"],
      "excludePatterns": [],
      "clients": {
        "GraphClient": { // Inferred from the provided --class-name or its default value 
          "language": "csharp",
          "outputPath": "./generated/graph/csharp",
          "clientClassName": "GraphClient",
          "clientNamespaceName": "Contoso.GraphApp",
          "features": {
            // Adding for future visibility, but not required for now
            /*"authentication": {
              "authenticationProvider": "Microsoft.Kiota.Authentication.AzureAuthProvider",
              "authenticationParameters": {
                "clientId": "guid"
              },
            },*/
            "serializers": [
              "Contoso.Json.CustomSerializer"
            ],
            "deserializers": [
              "Contoso.Json.CustomDeserializer"
            ],
            "structuredMimeTypes": [
              "application/json"
            ],
            "usesBackingStore": true,
            "includeAdditionalData": true
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## End-to-end scenarios using the CLI

### Get started to generate an API

> ```bash

Reviewer: in this proposal, I'm not seeing any mention of the update command. 
We could reuse it and have and additional parameter like `--maintain-descriptions` (default false)
This way:

# generate for a single API

Does:
1. init (no new command for that, add implicitly does it for you)
2. add api/client
3. update

# update (without the new parameter)

refreshes the client with the new version of kiota, and refreshes the description while at it.

# update (with the new parameter)

only refreshes the client, not the descriptions

                    "properties": {
                      "structuredMediaTypes": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "items": {
                          "type": "string"
                        }
                      },
                      "serializers": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "items": {
                          "type": "string"
                        }
                      },
                      "deserializers": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "items": {
                          "type": "string"
                        }
                      },
                      "usesBackingStore": {
                        "type": "boolean"
                      },
                      "includeAdditionalData": {
                        "type": "boolean"
                      }
                    }
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        },
        "disabledValidationRules": {
          "type": "array",
          "items": {
            "type": "string"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer: We might be missing commands to add new paths/operations to existing clients. Or maybe the add command already does that for you but it's not called out?
We might be missing a command to remove a path/operation from a client, without deleting the client itself?
